bs_bs_banner




 Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••                                                                     doi: 10.1111/arcm.12466




    A S I M P L E B AY E S I A N A P P R O A C H T O T R E E - R I N G D AT I N G *

                                        M. M. HASSAN,1† E. JONES2 and C. E. BUCK2
                                   1
                                   Faculty of Science, University of Zakho, Zakho, Kurdistan, Iraq
                             2
                              School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK

                   Tree-ring dating involves matching sequences of ring widths from undated timbers to dated
                   sequences known as ‘master’ chronologies. Conventionally, the undated timbers (from a
                   building or woodland) are sequentially matched against one another, using t-tests to identify
                   the relative offsets with the ‘best’ match, thus producing a ’site’ chronology. A date estimate
                   is obtained when this is matched to a local master chronology of known calendar age. Many
                   tree-ring sequences in the UK produce rather low t-values and are thus declared not to have
                   a ‘best’ match to a master chronology. Motivated by this and the routine use of Bayesian
                   statistical methods to provide a probabilistic approach to radiocarbon dating, this paper in-
                   vestigates the practicality of Bayesian dendrochronology. We explore a previously published
                   model for the relationship between ring widths and the underlying climatic signal,
                   implementing it within the Bayesian framework via a simulation-based approach. Probabil-
                   ities for a match at each offset are produced, removing the need to identify a single ‘best’
                   match. The Bayesian model proves successful at matching in both simulated and real
                   examples.

                   KEYWORDS: TREE-RING DATING, STATISTICAL MODELS, BAYESIAN STATISTICS, PRIOR
                             INFORMATION, MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO SIMULATION



                                                               INTRODUCTION

 Dendrochronology, or tree-ring dating, uses the patterns of tree-ring growth to date timber
 samples. Each year a tree grows a new extra ring, and the width of that ring depends on several
 factors; mainly the climate and growth trend. It is assumed that trees of the same species within
 the same geographical region receive the same climatic signal throughout a given year because
 they are exposed to similar climatic growth conditions, but this signal varies from year to year
 (Litton and Zainodin 1991). Good growing seasons usually provide wide rings, whereas poor
 ones produce narrow rings. This pattern of ring widths is the key to both dendrochronology
 and dendroclimatology (using the pattern of tree-ring growth as an indicator of past ecological
 processes and to reconstruct past climate). For more information about dendrochronology and
 dendroclimatology, see Cook et al. (1990) and Fritts (1976). The focus of this paper is
 dendrochronology.
    Dendrochronologists use patterns of annual ring widths to date timbers by matching a group of
 trees from the same geographical location one with another to ensure that every single ring is
 matched to its exact date of formation. This process is called ‘cross-matching’ or ‘cross-dating’
 and is now usually based on statistical techniques (detailed in the second section), which are used
 to measure the similarity between the cross-matched sequences. In order to use the pattern of
 tree-ring widths to date timbers and provide the calendar period during which a tree grew, it is

               *Received 25 April 2018; accepted 21 January 2019
               †Corresponding author: email masoud.hassan@uoz.edu.krd
               © 2019 University of Oxford
2                                     M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

essential to build a master chronology, which is a long, mean ring-width sequence made from
large numbers of continuously overlapping timbers. A cross-matching process can then be used
to date a ring-width sequence from a timber of unknown date by comparing it with the relevant
master chronologies.
   Site chronologies seldom comprise any trees of known age and so are initially undated. Hence
the need for a regional chronology that does contain measurements from trees of known age so
that, when all the available tree-ring index sequences from that region are matched one to an-
other, we obtain calendar date estimates for every tree ring in the sequence.
   Over the past decades, many efforts have been made to develop statistical models for den-
drochronology. The earlier statistical models, such as those suggested by Fritts (1976) and
Litton and Zainodin (1991), were typically based on extending linear, empirically determined
relationship between tree-ring indices and climate. This paper explores the use of the statistical
model ﬁrst proposed by Litton and Zainodin. This is fully probabilistic and provides a basis for
the implementation of a Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating. It was not widely adopted by
the dendrochronology community at the time of publication, however, as the use of Bayesian
methods was not common and they were difﬁcult to implement. The routine use and current
success of Bayesian methods in radiocarbon dating, through modern radiocarbon calibration
software such as OxCal (Bronk-Ramsey 2008) and BCal (Buck et al. 1999), means that it
now seems timely to explore the Litton and Zainodin (1991) model once more. Those unfamil-
iar with the Bayesian approach to radiocarbon dating might like to consult Buck et al. (1996,
esp. ch. 9) before reading the details of this paper. Our eventual goal is a fully Bayesian ap-
proach to the dating of timbers that will allow dendrochronological dates to be formally com-
bined with those from radiocarbon dating, which is currently not practical due to the
incompatibility of the inference methods used.
   The paper is structured as follows. The next section provides a brief literature review of the
existing statistical methods that are key to understanding the process of dendrochronology, in-
cluding pre-processing of tree-ring data, cross-matching sequences, constructing chronologies
and modelling tree-ring growth. The third section introduces the Bayesian approach to
tree-ring dating, which involves formalization of the cross-matching process, and implementa-
tion alongside the model proposed by Litton and Zainodin (1991). The fourth section includes
results of the Bayesian implementation using both simulated and real data to investigate the
proposed model and matching process. We present several experiments, matching undated
tree-ring sequences to both local and regional master chronologies. The ﬁfth section
summarizes the research work and draws conclusions from it, offers recommendations for
the use of the suggested model and matching process by the dendrochronologists, and sug-
gests further work that is needed before Bayesian dendrochronology could be adopted
routinely.
   All the code for the implementation of the models suggested within this paper is written in R
(R Core Team 2015).

                          EXISTING STATISTICAL METHODS IN DENDROCHRONOLOGY

Dendrochronological studies and analysis depend on a series of statistical procedures. Currently
these start by pre-processing data to remove any growth trend from the data (by ﬁtting a curve to
the raw tree-ring sequences); statistical measures such as correlation coefﬁcient and Student’s
t-value are then used in cross-matching ring-width sequences and hence providing a calendar
date for an undated timber.

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                       A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                 3

Pre-processing data
Before using tree-ring data for cross-matching, they are pre-processed to remove any age growth
effect and non-climatic factors. The process of removing trend from tree-ring-width sequences is
called ‘detrending’, and the resulting pre-processed data are called ring-width ‘indices’. One of
the main non-climate factors that exists in ring-width data is age growth trend. When the tree
is younger it usually grows faster, and a wider ring is formed. As the tree ages, the growth of ring
width slows. Thus, before dating timbers in dendrochronology, this age-related trend must be
identiﬁed and removed from raw ring-width measurements for physical and statistical reasons:
physically to remove the geometrical impacts of the growth trend; and statistically to obtain sta-
tionary time-series sequences which are comparable. Removing the growth trend can be achieved
by ﬁltering the data (ﬁtting a moving average) or standardizing the data (ﬁtting a growth curve
and ﬁnding the ratio of the raw ring width divided by the expected ring width from the curve).
For detrending our data in this paper, we used the ‘modiﬁed negative exponential’ method sug-
gested by Fritts (1976). For more information about this method and other detrending methods,
see Fritts (1976) and Cook et al. (1990).

Cross-dating tree-ring sequences
Having successfully prepared tree-ring-width data by pre-processing them to remove age trend,
the patterns of the obtained ring-width indices from the same geographical location can then
be compared with one another in order to date them. There are several methods currently used
by dendrochronologists for matching tree-ring-width sequences. The following is one commonly
used illustrative example (for others, see Cook et al. 1990; and Fritts 1976).

t-test method The Student’s t-value, suggested by Baillie and Pilcher (1973), is now commonly
and routinely used by dendrochronologists to decide how good the match is between the two
ring-width sequences when cross-matching. For the t-value calculation to be a valid measure
of signiﬁcance, it must be assumed that the sequences of tree-ring indices are independent obser-
vations that follow a normal distribution with mean zero and constant variance.
   Let there be two stationary sequences of ring-width indices, y1 and y2, of length l1 and l2,
respectively. Let there also be at least q rings in common between the two sequences resulting
in l1 + l2  2q + 1 possible offsets. Now, let r(y1; y2; Δ) be the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
between the two standardized sequences, y1 and y2, at offset Δ. The Student’s t-value for each
possible offset, Δ, between the two sequences, y1 and y2, is calculated as follows:
                                                       pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                      r q2
                                    t ðy1 ; y2 ; ΔÞ ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ :
                                                       ð1  r 2 Þ
   As the value of r increases, the t-value increases, and this indicates that the two sequences are
matching well at offset Δ.
   Baillie and Pilcher (1973) used a threshold t-value of 3.5 to indicate an acceptable match for
tree-ring dating, which gives a 0.1% signiﬁcance level for overlaps > 100 rings. The higher
the t-value, the better the match is between the two sequences. The use of an arbitrary 3.5 t-value
threshold has become routine practice in dendrochronology. However, it does not suggest that
any offset with t-value higher than this threshold is correct, and there might be a cases where
the match with t ≤3.5 gives a correct offset or t ≥3.5 gives an incorrect offset (Wigley et al.
1987). This method of matching timbers has been used by many dendrochronologists, including

                                                           © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
4                                     M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

Baillie (1977, 1995), Brown et al. (1986), Hillam (2008), Mills (1988), Orton (1983), Pilcher
(1990), Sander and Levanic (1996), and Walker (2005). We will use this method here as a
classical approach to be compared with the Bayesian approaches that we propose.

Constructing chronologies
Having successfully matched single sequences with one another (using a t-test or one of the other
methods described by Fritts 1976), the next step is to build a site chronology. A ‘site’ can be
deﬁned as the timbers from a building or from a speciﬁc (well-deﬁned) geographical region,
for example, a woodland. Once pairwise matching has been successful, groups of sequences
are said to be matched for any three sequences A, B and C, with:
• A and B matching at offset D(A,B);
• B and C matching at offset D(B,C);
• A and C matching at offset D(A,C);
if and only if the following condition holds:
• D(A,C) = D(A,B) + D(B,C).
   If the dendrochronologist is satisﬁed (via such pairwise matching) that the groups of sequences
have a strong enough match to be considered to have ring widths that grew in the same year, then
a site chronology can be established by averaging the ring widths that are aligned at the same
offset D. See below for details on how this is done.
   A master chronology is an average (arithmetic mean) ring-width sequence for a speciﬁc spe-
cies, which is built by successively matching a group of long tree ring-width sequences (Laxton
and Litton 1988). If ring-width sequences are included of known date, for example, from samples
of living trees, then a date can be assigned to each ring width in the entire master chronology and
thus it can be used for dating other ring-width sequences of unknown age. Master chronologies
can draw on data from a single site or from large geographical areas and are described as either
‘local’ or ‘regional’, respectively.

Local master chronology As described above, a ‘local’ or ‘site’ master chronology is a sequence
created by cross-matching a group of overlapping trees from a single location or small geograph-
ical region. The robustness of the resulting chronology is typically measured by the number of
trees whose rings contribute to the chronology in each year, which may well vary over its length.
Using classical statistical methods, it has been shown that a reliable site chronology can typically
be created from eight to 10 overlapping trees of the same species (Baillie and Pilcher 1973). It is
also common practice to create a site chronology using tree-ring index sequences in which all pairs
of trees overlap by at least 40 rings (Laxton and Litton 1988). Such practices lead to site
chronologies in the standard databases of tree-ring sequences which vary from 100 to 500 years
in overall length.

Regional master chronology A ‘regional’ master chronology is a long sequence created by cross-
matching, and averaging, a group of site chronologies from a particular region, typically including
at least one dated chronology. Regional master chronologies thus tend to represent a larger geo-
graphical area than site chronologies and can serve as a ‘reference’ for cross-matching undated
tree-ring-width sequences.
   UK regional chronologies typically vary from 200 to more than 1000 years. For example,
the UK East Midlands chronology (Laxton and Litton 1988) covers 1100 years (882–
1981 AD) and was built from 59 local master chronologies. Litton and Zainodin (1991) suggest

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                        A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                              5

that a regional master chronology should comprise at least ﬁve to 10 overlapping site
chronologies.

Producing a site chronology Several methods have been used by dendrochronologists to com-
bine ring-width sequences into a site master chronology. The simplest and most widely used is to
average a group of standardized ring-width indices from a particular year. As long as there is a
large enough number of tree rings from each year, this minimizes the effect of outliers, and the site
chronology is highly validated (Baillie 1982).
   Let yti be the ring-width index for a particular year t from tree i, where i = 1, … , I, and I is the
number of ring sequences obtained from a speciﬁc geographical location, then the value of the
site chronology at year t is:
                                                        y
                                             C t ¼ ∑Ii¼1 ti
                                                         I

where Ct is an estimate of the climatic signal in year t, t = 1, 2, … , l, and l is the length of the site
chronology C.

Modelling tree-ring growth
Statistical model A simple statistical model that represents the relationship between climatic
signal and pre-processed ring-width data (or indices) was ﬁrst suggested by Fritts (1976). This
model assumes that the tree-ring index in year t is equal to the underlying climatic signal
(which is common to all trees within a particular geographical area) plus some noise due to
non-climatic effects. The model was then used by Litton and Zainodin (1991), who sought a
formal way of using statistical models for tree-ring dating and cross-matching sequences.
The model is deﬁned as follows:

                                           yti ¼ β þ ut þ ϵti ;                                                   (1)

where yti is the fully processed (and thus stationary and uncorrelated) ring-width index at year t
for tree i; β is the overall mean of the population of ring-width indices; ut indicates the underlying
climatic signal in year t; and ϵti denotes the noise of tree i in year t. The noise component ϵti in-
cludes all other non-climatic factors, such as soil condition, site location, presence of pest and
disease, and competition among trees for sunlight. The signal ut and noise ϵti are assumed to
be independent for statistical convenience. They are both independent and identically
                                                                                            normally
                                                                                                      
distributed with mean zero and variance σ 2u and σ 2e , respectively; ut ∼N 0; σ 2u and ϵti ∼N 0; σ 2e
. The ring-width index yti is thus independent and identically normally distributed with mean zero
and variance σ 2u þ σ 2e . The signal-to-noise ratio, S, which identiﬁes the strength of similarities
among groups of tree-ring-index sequences, is deﬁned as:

                                           σ 2u 2 2
                                     S¼        ; σ ; σ > 0 S > 0;                                                 (2)
                                           σ 2e u e
where σ 2u and σ 2e are the variance of the climatic signal ut and the variance of the noise ϵti, respec-
tively. The larger the value of S, the more similar are the trees.




                                                         © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
6                                      M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

Using the statistical model for dating The model described in equation 1 was successfully used
by Litton and Zainodin (1991) for dating ring-width sequences using the following three
approaches.
                                                                                 0        0
   Cross-matching two samples Let two trees i and i (i ≠ i ) from the same geographical region
be compared for the purpose of dating. The correlation coefﬁcient r between the two compared
sequences for the same year t can be calculated using:

                                                                     σ 2u     S
                                               r yti ; yti0 ¼                 ¼   :
                                                                    σu þ σe S þ 1
                                                                     2      2

   The similarity between the two sequences can be evaluated via the signal-to-noise ratio, S. As
S increases, the correlation r between the two cross-matched ring-width sequences increases and
the similarity between them increases, too. The ‘best’ match is then at the offset with the highest
value of S.

    Cross-matching a sample to a chronology Under the assumptions of the model in equation 1,
a single tree-ring-index sequence yti can be compared with a well-replicated average sequence ̄ yt:
at year t, and the correlation between the two sequences would be:

                                                         σ 2u                                    S
                         rðyti ; yt: Þ ¼ rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                              ¼ qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                                                                     ;
                                                                                                1
                                               2       σe2
                                             σu þ I σu þ σe       2         2         S   þ    I       ð S   þ    1 Þ

where ̄ yt: is the average sequence created from I samples of ring-width indices from the same
                                                  
                                                σ2
region, with E ðyt: Þ ¼ 0 and Varðyt: Þ ¼ σ 2u þ e . Zainodin (1988) concluded that the correla-
                                                 I
tion between a sample and an average sequence from the same geographical            region is always
greater than that between the two individual sequences; rðyti ; yt: Þ > r yti ; yti0 .

   Cross-matching two chronologies The same statistical model can also be used for cross-
matching two averaged sequences. Let yt: and yt:0 be two chronologies created from I1 and I2 trees,
                                                              σ2                     σ2
respectively, with zero means and variances Varðyt: Þ ¼ σ 2u þ e and Var yt:0 ¼ σ 2u þ e , respec-
                                                              I1                       I2
tively. The correlation coefﬁcient between the two cross-matched chronologies is:
                                                     σ 2u                                   S
                        r yt: ; yt:0 ¼ rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                          ¼ rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                                                             :
                                                     σe2                σe2
                                           σu þ I 1 σu þ I 2
                                             2                   2                  S þ I1 S þ I2
                                                                                             1                1



Zainodin (1988) also noted that a higher correlation coefﬁcient, r, is obtained between two aver-
aged chronologies than between an average and a sample or two individual samples, that is:
                                                                                    
                                            r yt: ; yt:0 > rðyti ; yt: Þ > r yti ; yti0 :
Thus, grouping trees from the same climatic region is preferable for all currently used and pro-
posed tree-ring dating methods.


© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                          A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                    7
                         BAYESIAN DENDROCHRONOLOGY: A NEW APPROACH

This section introduces a Bayesian approach for tree-ring dating using the statistical model (in
equation 1). This new probabilistic approach involves simultaneously ﬁtting the model and se-
quentially matching the undated trees to the dated master chronology with a view to identifying
the offset with the highest probability of a match and thus the most likely date for the undated
chronology. Following is a brief summary of the proposed Bayesian implementation of tree-ring
dating.

Matching notation
Let the dated master chronology be of length l years and comprise I trees. Let the start and end
dates of the dated master chronology be Δs and Δe, respectively, so that l = Δe  Δs + 1. For tree i,
i = 1, 2, … , I, let δi be the start date of the tree i; li be its age (length of the sequence; years); and δi
+ li  1 be its felling date. Similarly, let the undated site chronology be of length l* years and have
I* trees. Let Δ* be the unknown start date of the undated site chronology. For tree i, i = I + 1, … , I
+ I*, let δi = Δ* + hi be its unknown start date (where hi ≥ 0, is the offset of tree i relative to Δ*); l i
be the length of the tree; and δi þ l i  1 be the end date of the tree.
   The dating process starts by consecutively matching the undated site chronology to the dated
master chronology at all possible offsets from t = Δs  l* + q to t = Δe + l*  q, where q is the min-
imum overlap of rings between the dated and undated sequences. Therefore, the total number of
all possible offsets between the two sequences is: l + l*  2q + 1.

Model outline and implementation
The model and matching process are implemented within a Bayesian framework. As in all such
implementations, we must deﬁne and compute a prior distribution and likelihood for each param-
eter in the model and then multiply these together to estimate the posterior distribution for each
parameter and, in particular, estimate the calendar age of each (undated) tree ring.

 likelihood  Adopting the basic statistical model in equation 1, let y = (y1, … , yI) and y ¼
                                                                             D                     UD
The
 yIþ1 ; …; yIþI  represent the tree-ring indices for all dated and undated trees, respectively, so
                                                                                          
that the indices for all trees together are y ¼ ðyD ; yUD Þ ¼ y1 ; …; yn ; yIþ1 ; …; yIþI  . The likeli-
hood of the dated and undated master chronologies can be given, respectively, as:
                                              "     12                             #
                                       I        δi þli 1
                                                       1             1              2
                p yD jβ; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e ∝ ∏   ∏             exp  2 ðyti  β  ut Þ
                                       i¼1   t¼δi     σ 2e          2σ e
                                            "               1                           #
            UD                   
                                     IþI  Δ þri þli 1 1 2             1              2
          p y jβ; u; σ u ; σ e ; Δ ∝ ∏
                       2 2
                                                  ∏              exp  2 ðyti  β  ut Þ      :
                                      i¼Iþ1    t¼Δ þri     σ 2e         2σ e
Hence, the likelihood of all data can be obtained by combining both the likelihood of the undated
site and dated master chronologies:
                                                                                               
                   p yjβ; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e ; Δ ∝p yD jβ; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e p yUD jβ; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e ; Δ :




                                                                 © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
8                                     M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck
                                                                                        
The priors In order to make an inference about the unknown parameters β; σ 2u ; σ 2e ; Δ , we
deﬁne prior distributions for each model parameter as follows.

   Prior for β The parameter β should have a symmetrical distribution with a mean close to zero
as the ring-width indices have been standardized and are distributed with mean 0 and variance 1.
Accordingly, an appropriate prior distribution for this parameter would be normally distributed
with mean 0 and variance k, where k is a constant to be determined. For the experiments
discussed in the next section, we used a non-informative prior for β, with k chosen as 1000 to
give a ﬂat prior as we consider having little knowledge about the data and hence it has the least
effect on the inference process.

    Prior for σ 2u and σ 2e For practical statistical reasons, it is common practice to model the pre-
cision, σ12, rather than the variance itself due to the conjugacy properties between the normal and
gamma distributions which simpliﬁes the sampling procedure. The gamma is a fairly ﬂexible dis-
tribution and can, when appropriate, give an uninformative ﬂat prior when the parameters of the
gamma distribution are small. We chose the prior distribution for σ12 and σ12 to be Γ(au, bu) and
                                                                          u       e
Γ(ae, be), respectively, with the shape (au and ae) and rate (bu and be) parameters to be deter-
mined. For the experiments below, we used a small value of 0.01 for the shape and rate param-
eters. We chose such a prior largely because it is mathematically convenient and is ﬂat (and thus
uninformative) over most of the range 0–1. It does, however, place a large weight near zero,
which could produce undesirable results in some circumstances and would certainly be worth
revisiting in future work. In practice, in all the examples considered in this paper, we found that
there is sufﬁcient information about these parameters in the data that the choice of prior did not
have a marked impact on the posterior.

    Prior for Δ* Current practice in dendrochronology is to assume that a priori any possible date
is just as likely as any other; thus, it is desirable to use a non-informative prior for the unknown
date, one that allows equal weight to each of the possible Δ* available. An obvious and simple
prior distribution for Δ* is thus a discrete Uniform distribution such that
p(Δ*) ∼ U[Δs  l* + q, Δe + l*  q]. The prior probability of each date in t = 1, 2, … , l is thus
     1
lþl 2qþ1.


The posterior Under the Bayesian framework, combining the likelihood and prior distributions
(detailed below), the joint posterior distribution of the model parameters and matching process is
given by:
                                                                                 
                    p β; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e ; Δ jy ∝p yjβ; u; σ 2u ; σ 2e ; Δ pðβÞ p σ 2u p σ 2e pðΔ Þ:

  It is not practical to evaluate this distribution algebraically. Instead, we used a Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation method that allows sampling from the posterior distribution.
See Gilks et al. (1996) for an introduction to general MCMC methods and implementation;
and Goldstein (2011) for an introduction to MCMC sampling for multilevel statistical models.

Implementing the Bayesian model A standard Gibbs sampler is used to estimate the marginal
distributions by sampling from the full conditional distribution for each parameter, as outlined in
Appendix A.

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                             A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                  9

Simulating data for model implementation
In order to test the MCMC implementation of the Bayesian statistical model, and associated
matching process, we simulated tree ring-width indices using the model given in equation 1
(pseudo-code for each step of our simulation is given in Appendix B). In specifying the features
of the simulated data, we explored the International Tree-Ring Data Bank (http://www.ncdc.
noaa.gov/paleo/treering.html), which is the world’s largest archive of tree ring data, using our
ﬁndings to characterize a range of common data properties as follows.
   Signal-to-noise ratio (S)
   The signal-to-noise ratio (S), detailed in equation 2, measures how similar a group of tree-ring-
width sequences are within a chronology. When σ 2u is large (relative to σ 2e ), the signal-to-noise
ratio is large, and vice versa. To simulate data to test the Bayesian implementation of the model,
we used a range of S values (given in Table 1) to mimic a plausible range of data types. Since raw
tree-ring data are typically detrended, pre-whitened and then normalized, as detailed in the sec-
ond section, the data we simulated are normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 1. This im-
plies that the sum of the climatic signal variance, σ 2u , and the model noise variance, σ 2e , is 1.
                                                                                                     
   This change requires a slight amendment to our model so that, in equation 1, ut ∼N 0; σ 2u ,
                                     
where σ 2u < 1, and ϵti ∼N 0; 1  σ 2u . Implementing this requires an amendment to the Gibbs sam-
   algorithm outlined in Appendix A, whereby step 5 simply becomes ‘Set
pler
p σ 2e ð1Þ jy; βð1Þ ; uð1Þ ; σ 2uð1Þ ; Δð0Þ ¼ 1  σ 2uð1Þ ’. We make this change now, rather than modelling
in this way originally, since the original model is more general. If our approach is adopted more
widely, we hope users will ﬁnd they can use the model and implementation described below
without the need for detrending, pre-whitening and normalizing, since modelling data directly
is always more satisfactory than transforming. For the moment, however, we adopt standard
practice.
   The dated master chronology
   A dated site master chronology is required for the cross-matching
                                                          2            process. Dated sequences
were simulated by adding normally distributed noise, N 0; σ e , to the simulated climatic signals,
ut. A dated master chronology was then obtained by grouping simulated trees, with the following
parameters:


Table 1   Different signal-to-noise ratios (S) with corresponding model variance components used for simulating the data
                         for exploring the Bayesian implementation of the model in equation 1


S                     σ2u                     σ2e                    S                       σ2u                       σ2e

0.1                 0.1001                  0.8999                  1.1                   0.5238                     0.4762
0.2                 0.1667                  0.8333                  1.2                   0.5455                     0.4545
0.3                 0.2308                  0.7692                  1.3                   0.5652                     0.4348
0.4                 0.2857                  0.7143                  1.4                   0.5833                     0.4167
0.5                 0.3333                  0.6667                  1.5                   0.6000                     0.4000
0.6                 0.3750                  0.6250                  1.6                   0.6154                     0.3846
0.7                 0.4118                  0.5882                  1.7                   0.6296                     0.3704
0.8                 0.4444                  0.5556                  1.8                   0.6429                     0.3571
0.9                 0.4737                  0.5263                  1.9                   0.6552                     0.3448
1.0                 0.5000                  0.5000                  2.0                   0.6667                     0.3226



                                                                © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
10                                    M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

• Length of the dated master chronology (l): the length of dated site master chronologies varies
   from one site to another: between 50 and 500 years. Regional chronologies often cover many
   more years than site chronologies as they contain many more samples. To test the Bayesian
   implementation of the model and matching process, we simulated chronologies of 200 years
   to represent a local site master chronology and chronologies of 1000 years to represents a re-
   gional master chronology.
• Number of samples (I) in the dated master chronology: the number of trees in the dated master
   chronologies also varies from one site to another. For the experiments that follow, we simu-
   lated site chronologies with 10, ﬁve, two and one sequence(s), and regional chronologies with
   100 sequences.
• Length of individual trees (li) in the dated master chronology: we randomly simulated trees of
   length (75 ≤ li ≤ 150) to mimic real trees of the dated site chronologies.Minimum overlap be-
   tween dated and undated site chronologies
   Standard practice in dendrochronology (as ﬁrst suggested by Laxton and Litton 1988) tends to
require between 40 and 50 rings of overlap between dated and undated chronologies. Here, a
minimum of 50 rings of overlap will be used for simulating data.
   Undated site chronology
   An undated site chronology was obtained by grouping simulated trees, with the following
parameters:
• Length of the undated site chronology (l*): the length of the undated site chronology should be
   shorter than the length of the dated master chronology, l* ≤ l, to ensure the matching process.
   Thus, for data simulation, we considered undated site chronologies of length 200, 100 and
   50 years.
• Number of samples (I*) in the undated site chronology: the number of individual trees in the
   undated site chronologies should also be less than or equal to the number of individual trees
   in the dated site chronologies, I* ≤ I. Therefore, chronologies with 10, ﬁve and one sample(s)
   were simulated.
• The length of the individual trees (l i ) in the undated site chronology: for the Bayesian model
   implementation, we simulated undated trees of length (50 ≤ li ≤ 100) to mimic real undated trees
   in the International Tree-Ring Data Bank.The true offset of the undated site master chronology
   The true date offset of the undated site master chronology to the dated site master chronology
is ﬁxed at index 100 throughout the experiments. This is in order to compare the results of the
experiments as the other parameters are changing.


Further implementation considerations
For each experiment in the fourth section, an initial run of 10 000 iterations of the Gibbs sampler
was simulated using start values that were known not to be close to the true posterior values. Al-
though not reproduced here, iteration-by-iteration plots of the output from the MCMC simulation
for each parameter (known as trace plots) were used informally to approximate the length of
burn-in required for convergence of the Markov Chain (MC) for each continuous parameter.
The Raftery and Lewis diagnostic test (Raftery and Lewis 1992) was also used to check the
length of burn-in and to establish whether or not thinning of the MC was desirable (to obtain un-
correlated samples) and how many iterations the chain should be run after burn-in (to obtain a
representative sample from the posterior).
   As Δ* is a discrete variable, it was difﬁcult to ascertain a diagnostic test to ensure that the chain
had converged. Instead a check on the reproducibility of the results was conducted by using three

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                                     A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                            11

MCMC runs, each with a different random number generator seeds. The posterior probabilities
for Δ* for each of the three runs were then compared. This determined how many iterations were
needed to produce results for Δ* that were reproducible to two decimal places. The number re-
quired varied between experiments.


                                RESULTS OF BAYESIAN CROSS-MATCHING EXPERIMENTS

Local site chronology examples
This section reports the results from a selection of experiments on test data derived as outlined
above. We compare the Bayesian results directly with those from conventional tree-ring dating
methods and highlight the key advantages of using probabilities rather than t-values to convey
the strength of match between sequences.


Matching an undated sample to a dated site master with a match Consider ﬁrst the situation
where we have simulated data for a master chronology and an undated sample using the same
underlying model, thus ensuring there is a match between the two. Table 2 shows results for such
experiments that match a single undated tree-ring-index sequence, of length 100 years, to a dated
site master chronology containing 10 samples which covers a period of 200 years. When the
signal-to-noise ratio, S, ≥ 0.3, the posterior probability of a match at the true offset is 1. For all
such experiments, the true offset has a t-value that is very large in comparison with t-values at
any other date offset and the Bayesian implementation provides the highest posterior probability
of a match at the true offset for any S ≥ 0.2.


 Table 2       Results of experiments when matching one undated tree-ring index sequence of length 100 years to a dated
                         master chronology containing 10 samples which covers a period of 200 years


                                                       Posterior                                                           Traditional results

S              σ2u             σ2e          Offset         Probability               b
                                                                                     σ2u          b
                                                                                                  σ2e          b
                                                                                                               S            ρ             t-value

0.3         0.2308          0.7692           100                       1.00         0.23         0.77         0.3         0.451           5.004
                                             118                       0.00                                               0.310           2.912
0.2         0.1667          0.8333           100                       0.79         0.16         0.84         0.2         0.372           3.969
                                             118                       0.10                                               0.278           2.649
                                             101                       0.05                                               0.284           2.850
                                             48                       0.01                                               0.243           1.768
                                              14                       0.01                                               0.191           1.921
0.1         0.1001          0.8999           101                       0.17         0.09         0.91         0.1         0.271           2.778
                                             100                       0.14                                               0.277           2.851
                                             118                       0.10                                               0.233           2.215
                                              14                       0.08                                               0.203           1.999
                                               7                       0.05                                               0.240           2.282


      Matches with the highest posterior probabilities are reported; they do not always sum to 1 as there were offsets with very small pos-
      terior probabilities. The true offset of the undated site chronology is 100. The signal-to-noise ratio varies from S = 0.3 to 0.1; as S de-
      creases, the posterior probability of a match at the true offset decreases. To obtain these results, the Gibbs sampler was run for a total of
      100 000 iterations and thinned every 10, leading to a ﬁnal sample of 10 000.


                                                                               © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
12                                    M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

   Focusing now on the results shown in Table 2 (and Figure 1) relating to the experiments when
S = 0.2, we begin to see the real power of the Bayesian approach. Figure 1 provides reliable es-
timates for the parameters of the model and a summary of the posterior probabilities of a match
at all possible offsets. The posterior probability of a match at the true offset (ring 100) is 0.79,
which is more than seven times higher than that of the match with the next highest probability
(ring 118). By contrast, the respective t-values are 3.969 and 2.649 (Table 2), which are both
close to the 3.5 threshold commonly used in conventional tree-ring dating to indicate a candidate
match, and on an arbitrary scale, would be difﬁcult to interpret reliably were this a real dating
problem. When S = 0.1, the posterior probability of a date match at the true offset is small,
0.12, and is not the offset with the highest posterior probability of a match (offset 101 provides
the highest posterior probability of a match of 0.16). Nonetheless, the Bayesian approach pro-
vides posterior probabilities for each offset that are highly interpretable and could offer valuable
prior dating evidence for future dating efforts. By contrast, when S = 0.1, the traditional method-
ology provides t-values that are all below the 3.5 threshold, and are very similar in size, resulting
in an inconclusive date estimate of little value in future work.
   Expanding on these observations a little, Figure 2 provides a summary of the relationship be-
tween t-value and posterior probability from a selection of the experiments on simulated data ob-
tained during the course of preparing this paper. Observe that a range of t-values can be
associated with a single posterior probability, which means that the two scales are not monoton-
ically related. We see the same in Table 2, where the rank order of offsets differs between the
posterior probabilities and the t-values, meaning there is not a one-to-one relationship between
the two scales. Figure 2 also gives some idea about why the t = 3.5 threshold has worked so well
for many years: there is a plateau of t-values just below this threshold which are associated with
samples that lead to quite a wide range of posterior probabilities (around 0.75). Samples with




Figure 1 Plots of the posterior distributions of b    σ2u , b
                                                   β, b     σ2e , b
                                                                  u50 , b        b  for the experiment that matched one undated
                                                                        u100 and Δ
tree-ring-index sequence of 100 years to a dated master chronology with 10 samples, covering 200 years, when the signal-
to-noise ratio, S, was 0.2. The estimates for each parameter are very close to the values used to simulate the data. Note in
particular that the true offset (100) has a posterior probability of 0.79 and all other offsets have very small, but non-zero,
posterior probabilities.

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                            A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                13




Figure 2 Relationship between t-value and posterior probability obtained from several experiments of matching
undated sequences to dated master chronologies. Each point shows the highest posterior match probability and corre-
sponding t-value for experiments on simulated data of the sort outlined in the fourth section. The dotted line highlights
the t-value threshold commonly used in conventional tree-ring dating to indicate a candidate match.



t-values above the 3.5 threshold, however, all give rise to posterior probabilities of around 0.8
and above.
   Given these observations, were practitioners to seek a posterior probability threshold with
which to replace the current t-value, a probability of 0.80 would be a good candidate. This obser-
vation could lead readers to conclude that, in practical terms, there is little difference between the
two approaches. This is far from the case, however, since we did not develop this approach sim-
ply with a view to replacing the classical acceptance/rejection approach to the matching of tree-
ring samples with a Bayesian one. Rather, the goal was to offer a more subtle and powerful way
to work with poorly matching timbers. The Bayesian approach provides (1) the ability to quantify
the relative plausibility of multiple possible matches using probability (rather than t-values); and
(2) the possibility to integrate coherently dendrochronology with other dating methods. For ex-
ample, by combining our approach with a Bayesian approach to radiocarbon wiggle-matching,
one might rule out many of the possible matches in a case such as the third one in Table 2.
The key point here is that all dendrochronological matches are uncertain to a degree because they
are obtained by a statistical matching process, but the Bayesian matching process allows one to
obtain useful results in situations of lower certainty than do current approaches.

Matching an undated sample to a dated site master, with no match Until now we have focused
on situations where a true match exists between the undated sample and the relevant dated master
chronology. In practice, however, it is fairly common for no reliable match to be found.
   Using a signal-to-noise ratio of S = 0.2, we ﬁrst simulated a master chronology and then, quite
independently, simulated an undated site sample. Cross-matching the two results in posterior
probabilities at all possible offsets summarized in Figure 3. We see clearly that although some
offsets have higher posterior probabilities than others, all are very low. Indeed, the highest pos-
terior probability is 0.034 making it clear that this sample cannot be reliably dated.

Matching an undated site chronology to a regional master Returning once again to experiments
for which we know there is a true match in the master chronology, Table 3 shows the results from
the experiment of matching a 100-year undated site chronology (comprising ﬁve tree-ring-index

                                                                 © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
14                                        M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck




Figure 3 Posterior distribution of unknown date for the experiment of matching an undated site chronology, covering
100 years, to a dated master chronology, covering 200 years, when there is no true offset between the two chronologies,
and when the signal-to-noise ratio is S = 0.2. All posterior probabilities are very low.


sequences) to a 200-year dated master chronology containing 10 samples from a sub-region with
a signal-to-noise ratio of S = 0.2, using both the traditional approach to tree-ring dating and the
Bayesian approach proposed.
   Focusing on the Bayesian results, it can be seen that the two chronologies are matched at the
true offset with a posterior probability of 1. Posterior probabilities of 1 were also produced for
similar experiments, but with signal-to-noise ratios > 0.2, and are not reported here. Such con-
clusive results are not a surprise since as the numbers of samples in the site and master chronol-
ogies increase and/or the signal-to-noise ratio becomes larger, the climatic signal is stronger, and
so matching to the true offset becomes more likely.


Regional master chronology examples
This section considers experiments with matching simulated, undated site master chronologies to
a simulated dated regional master chronology following the experimental approach suggested
above. As a reminder, the dated regional master chronology covers a period of 1000 years and

    Table 3 Results when an undated site chronology comprising ﬁve tree-ring index sequences, covering 100 years, is
    matched to a dated master chronology constructed from 10 tree-ring index sequences, covering 200 years, when the
                                            signal-to-noise ratio is S = 0.2


                                                      Posterior                                                         Traditional results

S              σ2u              σ2e          Offset         Probability           σ2u
                                                                                  b           b
                                                                                              σ2e          b
                                                                                                           S             ρ             t-value

0.2          0.1667          0.8333           100               1.00             .18         0.82         0.2          0.527           6.146
                                               80               0.00                                                   0.303           2.647


      The true offset at which the undated sequence matches the master chronology is 100 with a correlation of 0.527 and t-value of 6.146.
      Offset 80 has the second highest t-value; the Bayesian implementation of the statistical model and the matching process have a pos-
      terior probability of zero at this offset. To obtain these results, the Gibbs sampler was run for a total of 50 000 iterations and thinned
      every ﬁve, leading to a ﬁnal sample of 10 000.




© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                       A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                          15

is well replicated, comprising 100 tree-ring-index sequences. The undated site master chronology
covers 200 years and contains 10 sequences. As the number of sequences in the dated regional
master chronology increases, the sampler speed decreases; thus, to ensure good replication of in-
dices within each year of the dated regional master chronology, each simulated tree-ring-index
sequence will be for 200 years. Three different experiments are conducted for each signal-to-
noise ratio; each experiment has a different true date offset. The three experiments allow explo-
ration of different correlations between the undated site master chronology and the dated regional
master chronology.
   Three separate undated site chronologies were simulated at three arbitrarily chosen offsets, and
so each undated site chronology matches to the dated regional chronology with a different corre-
lation. The results reported here required fewer iterations to provide converged posterior esti-
mates than those in the fourth section; the MCMC sampler was run for 30 000 iterations after a
small burn-in period and thinned every three iterations, giving reproducible results for three
chains each with different random number generator seeds. We found that the posterior estimates
    σ 2u and b
for b        σ 2e were very close to the true values in all three cases.
   Table 4 shows that for signal-to-noise ratios of S ≥ 0.2, regardless of the correlation between the
dated regional chronology and the undated site master chronology, the posterior probability of a
match at the true offset is 1. When the signal-to-noise ratio decreases to S = 0.1, the t-values at
the true offset are close or very close to the 3.5 threshold. The associated posterior probabilities
at each date offset reﬂect this uncertainty, but nonetheless offer very high probabilities at the true
offset and would thus provide reliable date estimates suitable for immediate interpretation or use as
a prior for future dating work. These results correspond closely with those from the fourth section.

A real example from the South West of England
It is notoriously difﬁcult to match, and thus date, timbers from the South West of England and the
success rate, at 30–40%, in this area is well below the national average. Given this, we chose data
from this region to test our methods. Data of known age for ﬁve sub-regions from the South West
of England were obtained from English Heritage and investigated. The South West regional chro-
nology constructed from these data consisted of just four sub-regions (Horner Wood, Abbeyford
Wood, Clovelly and Bocconoc) because the remaining sub-region (River Dart) matched to the
others with low t-values. This approach mimicked the traditional methodology implemented
by most dendrochronologists and resulted in a regional master chronology comprising 45 tim-
bers, spanning the period AD 1879–1993.
    In order to test the Bayesian modelling approach and matching process, the eight timbers from
the River Dart were then treated as undated and combined together to form a site chronology
which was then matched to the dated regional master chronology previously constructed.
    Table 5 shows that the Bayesian implementation of the statistical model and the matching pro-
cess successfully located the true date offset of the undated sequence with a posterior probability
of 0.98. This posterior probability is much higher than any of the posterior probabilities at alter-
native date offsets. The traditional methodology provided a t-value of 4.066 at this offset; which
is greater than the current 3.5 threshold, but most dendrochronologists would prefer a much
higher t-value in order to feel conﬁdent in the date match before reporting the result.
    Results in this section show that the Bayesian implementation of the statistical model and
matching process successfully located the true date offset of the undated sequence with high pos-
terior probability. The advantage of the Bayesian approach, however, is that we now have di-
rectly interpretable posterior probabilities that are potentially useful priors for future work.

                                                      © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
16                                        M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck
 Table 4 Results of experiments that match three separate undated site chronologies each comprising 10 trees (which
cover a period of 200 years) to a single dated regional master chronology (comprising 100 trees which cover 1000 years)


                                                      Posterior                                                         Traditional results

S              σ2u             σ2e          Offset         Probability           σ2u
                                                                                 b              b
                                                                                                σ2e       b
                                                                                                          S              ρ           t-value

0.3          0.2308         0.7692           552               1.00            0.23         0.77         0.3           0.545          9.147
                                             115               0.00                                                    0.241          3.491
                                             346               1.00            0.23         0.77         0.3           0.562          9.570
                                             509               0.00                                                    0.283          3.159
                                             632               1.00            0.23         0.77         0.3           0.598         10.501
                                             486               0.00                                                    0.367          3.694
0.2          0.1667         0.8333           552               1.00            0.16         0.84         0.2           0.429          6.684
                                             115               0.00                                                    0.242          3.517
                                             346               1.00            0.16         0.84         0.2           0.456          7.205
                                             509               0.00                                                    0.293          3.147
                                             632               1.00            0.16         0.84         0.2           0.495          8.007
                                             486               0.00                                                    0.363          3.617
0.1          0.1001         0.8999           552               0.90            0.10         0.90         0.1           0.262          3.823
                                             115               0.03                                                    0.249          3.399
                                             346               0.98            0.10         0.90         0.1           0.306          4.442
                                             509               0.00                                                    0.174          3.003
                                             632               0.96            0.10         0.90         0.1           0.349          5.148
                                             486               0.00                                                    0.344          3.473


      The signal-to-noise ratios vary from S = 0.1 to 0.3, and the true offsets of the undated site sequences are 552, 346 and 632, respec-
      tively. Two matches with the highest posterior probabilities are reported; they do not always sum to 1 as there were offsets with pos-
      terior probabilities < 0.005. The two most probable matches are the two with the highest t-values in all cases. To obtain these results,
      the Gibbs sampler was run for a total of 100 000 iterations and thinned every 10, leading to a ﬁnal sample of 10 000.



    Table 5 Results of an experiment that matched an undated site chronology from the River Dart to a dated regional
                                  master chronology from the South West of England


Posterior                                                                                                            Traditional results

Offset                 Probability                   b
                                                     σ2u               b
                                                                       σ2e                  b
                                                                                            S                    ρ                   t-value

1879                       0.98                    0.14               0.86                0.16                 0.363                  4.066
1892                       0.01                                                                                0.166                  1.720
1777                       0.00                                                                                0.291                  3.18


      The true offset at which the undated chronology matches the regional master chronology is 1879. The three matches with the highest
      posterior probabilities are reported; they do not sum to 1 as there were offsets with posterior probabilities < 0.005. To obtain these
      results, the Gibbs sampler was run for a total of 50 000 iterations and thinned every ﬁve, leading to a ﬁnal sample of 10 000.




                                              CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK

The implementation of dendrochronology using Bayesian techniques has been achieved success-
fully. A series of experiments were conducted to investigate MCMC-based implementations of

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                       A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                         17

the statistical model and associated index-matching processes. These implementations proved
successful under the traditional assumptions that both chronologies to be matched are correctly
built, the chronologies are contemporary to one another, and that all the tress within both chro-
nologies have grown under the same climatic conditions.
   The proposed implementation enables dendrochronologists to provide posterior date estimates
for timbers in the form of probabilities rather than the commonly used t-value. This change in
presentation of date estimates enables their results to be more widely understood, especially by
those without any formal statistical training and, perhaps more importantly, has the potential
eventually to allow dating evidence from dendrochronology and radiocarbon dating to be
interpreted within the same inferential framework. Alternatively, the posterior date estimates
from tree-ring dating could simply be used to provide informative prior distributions for radiocar-
bon dating.
   As we have seen for Bayesian tree-ring dating, the speciﬁcation of prior distributions for the
model parameters and date offsets is necessary. Informative prior distributions for real dating
projects could be derived from the wealth of knowledge held by ancient building experts and
dendrochronologists, and from studies of timbers of known age. At present, such prior knowl-
edge can only be used informally in tree-ring dating. With the Bayesian framework, such prior
information can formally be incorporated within the inference process.
   Dendroclimatologists now use mechanistic forward models to represent the relationship be-
tween climate and ring width. The earlier statistical models, such as those suggested by Fritts
(1976) and Litton and Zainodin (1991), were typically based on extending a linear, empirically
determined, relationship between tree-ring indices and climate. However, linear empirical–
statistical analyses alone cannot reveal a physical or biological mechanism for variability in tree
growth. Hence, underlying physiological processes that modulate the details of tree growth are
needed for dendroclimatology models in order both to reconstruct the palaeoclimate accurately
and to help better interpret the process of growth. With this motivation in mind,
dendroclimatologists (Evans et al. 2006; Touchan et al. 2012; Vaganov et al. 2006) suggested
a deterministic, process-based model of the relationships between tree-ring growth and their
limiting climate factors known as the VS (Vaganov–Shashkin) model. Recently, a signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁed version of the full VS model called VSLite was proposed by Tolwinski-Ward et al.
(2013, 2011).
   Such mechanistic models aim to capture the mechanisms of key features of the complex sys-
tem that links climate to tree-ring growth. By directly modelling the way in which raw ring
widths arise, the need for pre-processing is removed. The success of the use of mechanistic
models within the dendroclimatology community suggests that their application to dendrochro-
nology could also have merit. Although the resulting model to describe the relationship between
the raw ring widths, the climate and growth processes may be more complex, the eventual pro-
cess of tree-ring dating would be simpler as it would not be necessary to pre-process the data.
Therefore, our next step will be to investigate the use of a mechanistic forward model, such as
the VSLite, for tree-ring dating.
   We will then need to compare results from the approach proposed in this paper with those from
a mechanistic model-based approach and make ﬁrm recommendations to the user community
about which Bayesian approach to use. In approaching this work, the following issues will need
be considered. First, we will need to ensure acceptable efﬁciency and runtime of code, because
our experimental code is written in R (R Core Team 2015) and is not fast enough to be used
for daily practice in dendrochronology laboratories. We might, for example, recode some func-
tions in a lower level programming language (such as C or C++) in order to speed up the program

                                                     © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
18                                    M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck

and make it of greater practical use. Furthermore, it is likely that the MCMC sampling could be
improved. For example, if the model in equation 1 is ﬁtted using raw (as opposed to standard-
ized) data, then, although they will not sum to 1, σ 2u and σ 2e are likely to be strongly anti-correlated
in the posteriors. Given this, a joint proposal, rather than the independent ones suggested in Ap-
pendix A, is likely to improve mixing. Second, we will need to develop a fully functional soft-
ware package in R (or some other suitable environment). A similar package to that introduced
by Bunn (2008) for classical dendrochronology could be developed fairly easily from our current
R code. We choose not to do this presently, however, since it will be most efﬁcient to do so only
after we establish whether this or a forward model-based approach is most effective.

                                                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We dedicate this paper to the life and work of Dr Cliff Litton, a much loved and highly regarded
colleague who passed away during the ﬁnal stages of the production of this text. Without Cliff’s
inspiration, insight and guidance this paper, and many others relating to Bayesian inference for
archaeology, would not have been possible. He will be sadly missed.
We also acknowledge the following sources of funding: KRG-HCDP (Ministry of Higher
Education and Scientiﬁc Research, Kurdistan Regional Government-Iraq), and the University
of Shefﬁeld (both of whom funded Hassan’s contribution to this work) and to the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council and English Heritage (who funded Jones’
contribution to this work via a Doctoral Training Partnership award and a collaborative
partnership, respectively).

                                                         REFERENCES

Baillie, M. G. L., 1977, An oak chronology for south Central Scotland, Tree-Ring Bulletin, 37, 33–44.
Baillie, M. G. L., 1982, Tree-ring dating and archaeology, Croom Helm, London.
Baillie, M. G. L., 1995, A slice through time, B.T. Batsford, London.
Baillie, M. G. L., and Pilcher, J. R., 1973, A simple crossdating program for tree-ring research, Tree-Ring Bulletin, 33, 7–14.
Bronk-Ramsey, C., 2008, Deposition models for chronological records, Quaternary Science Reviews, 27, 42–60.
Brown, D. M., Munro, M. A. R., Baillie, M. G. L., and Pilcher, J. R., 1986, Dendrochronology—The absolute Irish
    standard, Radiocarbon, 28, 279–83.
Buck, C. E., Cavanagh, W. G., and Litton, C. D., 1996, The Bayesian approach to interpreting archaeological data,
    Wiley, Chichester.
Buck, C. E., Christen, J. A., and James, G. N., 1999, BCal: An on-line Bayesian radiocarbon calibration tool, Internet
    Archaeology, 7, https://doi.org/10.11141/ia.7.1.
Bunn, A. G., 2008, A dendrochronology program library in R (dplR), Dendrochronologia, 26(2), 115–24.
Cook, E., Briffa, K., Shiyatov, S., and Mazepa, V., 1990, Tree-ring standardization and growth-trend estimation, in
    Methods of dendrochronology: Applications in the environmental sciences (eds. E. R. Cook and L. A. Kairiukstis),
    104–23, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
Evans, M., Reichert, B. K., Kaplan, A., Anchukaitis, K., Vaganov, E. A., Hughes, M. K., and Cane, M. A., 2006, A
    forward modeling approach to paleoclimatic interpretation of tree-ring data, Geophysical Research, 111, G03008.
Fritts, H. C., 1976, Tree Rings and Climate, Academic Press, London.
Gilks, W. R., Richardson, S., and Spiegelhalter, D. J., 1996, Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice, Chapman & Hall,
    London.
Goldstein, H., 2011, Multilevel Statistical Models, Wiley, Chichester.
Hillam, J., 2008, Dendrochronology: Guidelines on producing and interpreting dendrochronological dates, English
    Heritage, London.
Laxton, R. R., and Litton, C. D., 1988, An east midlands master tree-ring chronology and its use for dating vernacular
    buildings, University of Nottingham, Nottingham.
Litton, C. D., and Zainodin, H. J., 1991, Statistical models of dendrochronology, Journal of Archaeological Science, 18,
    429–40.

© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
                           A simple Bayesian approach to tree-ring dating                                                19
Mills, C., 1988, Dendrochronology: The long and the short of it, in Science and Archaeology (eds. E. A. slater and J.
    Tate), 549–65, BAR brit. Ser. 196, Oxford.
Orton, C. R., 1983, The use of Student’s t-test for matching treering patterns, Bulletin University London Institute of
    Archaeology, 20, 101–5.
Pilcher, J. R., 1990, Sample preparation, cross-dating, and measurement, in Methods of dendrochronology: Applications
    in the environmental sciences (eds. E. R. Cook and L. A. Kairiukstis), 40–50, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
R Core Team (2015). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical
    Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Raftery, A. E., and Lewis, S. L., 1992, How many iterations in the Gibbs sampler? in Bayesian statistics (eds. J. O.
    Berger, J. M. Bernado, A. P. Dawid, and A. F. M. Smith), 763–73, Oxford University Press, New York.
Sander, C., and Levanic, T., 1996, Comparison of t-values calculated in different dendrochronological programmes,
    Dendrochronologia, 14, 269–72.
Tolwinski-Ward, S. E., Evans, M. N., Hughes, M. K., and Anchukaitis, K. J., 2011, An efﬁcient forward model of the
    climate controls on interannual variation in tree-ring width, Climate Dynamics, 36, 2419–39.
Tolwinski-Ward, S. E., Anchukaitis, K., and Evans, M., 2013, Bayesian parameter estimation and interpretation for an
    intermediate model of tree-ring width, Climate of the Past Discussions, 9, 615–45.
Touchan, R., Shishov, V. V., Meko, D. M., and Grachev, A., 2012, Process-based model sheds light on climate sensitivity
    of Mediterranean tree-ring width, Biogeosciences, 9, 965–72.
Vaganov, E. A., Hughes, M. K., Shashkin, A. V., and Grachev, A., 2006, Growth dynamics of conifer tree rings, image of
    past and future environments, Springer, Berlin.
Walker, M., 2005, Quaternary dating methods, Wiley, Chichester.
Wigley, T. M. L., Jones, P. D., and Briffa, K. R., 1987, Cross-dating methods in dendrochronology, Journal of
    Archaeological Science, 14, 51–64.
Zainodin, H. J. (1988). Statistical models and techniques for dendrochronology. PhD thesis, University of Nottingham,
    UK.

Appendix A: Gibbs sampling algorithm
The Gibbs sampling procedure for the Bayesian implementation and matching process used in
this paper is as follows:
1 Choose starting values β(0), u(0), σ 2uð0Þ , σ 2e ð0Þ and Δ*(0).
2 Sample a value from pβ∣y; uð0Þ ; σ 2uð0Þ ; σ 2e ð0Þ ; Δð0Þ )generating β(1).
                                                                               ð1Þ
3 Sample a value from put jy; βð1Þ ; σ 2uð0Þ ; σ 2e ð0Þ ; Δð0Þ generating ut .
                                    ð1Þ ð1Þ 2ð0Þ            ð0Þ               2ð1Þ
4 Sample a value from pσ u ∣y; β ; u ; σ e ; Δ ) generating σ u .
                            2

5 Sample a value from pσ 2e ∣y; βð1Þ ; uð1Þ ; σ 2uð1Þ ; Δð0Þ ) generating σ 2e ð1Þ .
6 Sample a value from p Δ ∣y; βð1Þ ; uð1Þ ; σ 2uð1Þ ; σ 2e ð1Þ ) generating Δ*(1).
7 The starting values are replaced by the generated values and the steps are repeated until the
   Markov Chain reaches convergence (see the main test for a summary of how this was
   established).

Appendix B: Pseudo-code for data simulation
In order to simulate tree-ring-width indices for use in testing our approach for Bayesian
matching, the following algorithm was used:
1 Specify l, I, Δs and Δe for the dated site master chronology.
2 Identify l* and I* for the undated site master chronology.
3 Determine a signal-to-noise ratio, S, and hence σ 2u and σ 2e for the data.
4 Identify q, the minimum overlap between the two sequences.
5 Calculate l + l*  2q, the length of the climatic     vector required.
                                                  signal
6 Simulate a climatic signal vector from ut ∼N 0; σ 2u .
7 Simulate a dated site master chronology:
   • Create an (l × I) matrix by taking a subset of length (l) from the climatic signal ut and repli-
     cate it (I) times.

                                                                © 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
20                             M. M. Hassan, E. Jones and C. E. Buck
                                                          
     • Simulate an (l × I) noise matrix from ϵti ∼N 0; σ 2e :
     • Sum the climatic signal matrix and noise to give a matrix of ring-width indices yD, with in-
       dices for every sample in every year.

8 Simulate an undated site chronology:
  • Calculate all possible offsets, l + l*  2q + 1.
  • Choose an offset Δ* from t = Δs  l* + q to Δe  l*  q.
  • Create an (l* × I*) matrix by taking a subset of length (l*) from t = Δ*, … , Δ* + l*  1, and
    replicate it (I*) times.                             
  • Simulate an (l* × I*) noise matrix from ϵti ∼N 0; σ 2e .
  • Sum the climatic signal matrix and noise to give a matrix of undated ring-width indices yUD.

9 Use dated and undated data for the model implementation in matching process.




© 2019 University of Oxford, Archaeometry ••, •• (2019) ••–••
